---
title: 'The 8-hour myth'
description: ""
heroImage: "/blog/8-hour-myth/hero.png"
keywords: [ ]
pubDate: 'May 22 2025'
---

There's a conversation I've been having with myself lately, usually around 3 PM when my brain feels like it's swimming
through molasses. It goes something like this: *Why am I still here, staring at this screen, when I know—really
know—that nothing meaningful will emerge from these foggy afternoon hours?*

This isn't about laziness or lack of commitment. It's about something more fundamental: the growing disconnect between
how we structure work and how humans actually function at their best.

## The Myth of the Eight-Hour Day

The eight-hour workday is a relic from the industrial revolution, designed for factory floors where human output could
be measured in widgets per hour. Yet here we are, knowledge workers in 2025, still clinging to this arbitrary framework
like it's sacred scripture.

Let me share something honest: those rare times I've pushed myself into longer days—trying to squeeze out just a bit
more—have always left me feeling miserable. Not accomplished. Not proud. Just depleted, wondering why I thought staring
at a screen for extra hours would magically produce better work.

## What the Research Tells Us

The science backs up what our bodies already know. Cal Newport, in *Deep Work*, argues that most knowledge workers can
only sustain about 3-4 hours of truly focused, cognitively demanding work per day. Anders Ericsson's research on elite
performers—from violinists to chess players—shows they rarely practice more than 4-5 hours daily. Beyond that, returns
diminish dramatically.

Microsoft's Human Factors Lab found that the average knowledge worker checks email every 6 minutes. Six minutes. That's
barely enough time to load a complex thought into working memory, let alone solve a meaningful problem.

And the larger experiments? Iceland's trial of a 4-day work week (with no reduction in pay) found that productivity
actually increased across 2,500 workers. Sweden's experiments with 6-hour workdays showed similar results. Microsoft
Japan saw a 40% boost in productivity when they tested a 4-day week.

The pattern is clear: when we work less but with more intention, we accomplish more.

## A Philosophical Lens

The philosopher Byung-Chul Han writes about our "tiredness society," where we've become our own taskmasters, driving
ourselves toward burnout in the name of optimization and achievement. "The tiredness of exhaustion is not a tiredness of
positive potency," he observes. "It is a tiredness that separates and isolates."

This resonates deeply with what I've been experiencing. The constant push for productivity doesn't just exhaust us—it
disconnects us from ourselves, from others, from the very creativity we're trying to access.

## My Own Experiment

Here's what I've been doing: capping my workdays at six hours maximum, though most days I work closer to four. It's not
about rigid schedules or specific start times—it's about recognizing when I've given my best and having the wisdom to
stop.

But here's the crucial part: I've started building in purposeful pauses. A walk with my dog when my brain needs to
breathe. A trip to the grocery store. These moments of stepping away create space—space where connections form, where
problems untangle themselves, where I can simply exist without the weight of productivity.

The shift has been subtle but profound. My walks with my dog feel different now—not because they're longer or more
frequent, but because the anxious mental chatter has quieted. I go grocery shopping and actually notice things. I fix
those garage lights that have been broken for months. I have actual conversations with loved ones—not the exhausted,
half-present exchanges that used to pass for connection. Sometimes I just sit outside with a fiction book, letting my
mind wander into someone else's world.

I'm not living a life full of grand adventures or constant travel. That's not what I'm seeking. What I've found instead
is presence in the everyday—a deeper awareness in the simple rhythms of daily life. And that, surprisingly, has led to a
much happier existence.

![Intermission](/blog/8-hour-myth/intermission.png)

## The Courage to Change

I'll be honest—this feels scary to write. There's a voice in my head (probably yours too) that whispers: *But what will
clients think? What about competition? What about...*

But here's what grounds me: Antropia exists because of a belief in putting people first. We're not machines optimizing
for output. We're humans creating meaningful work while honoring our full humanity.

Our clients don't hire us to warm chairs or rack up billable hours. They hire us to solve problems, create beauty, build
systems that work. And we do that better when we're energized, focused, and fully human. When we put people over
everything else—our team, our clients, ourselves—the work naturally improves.

## Moving Forward

This isn't about working less for the sake of it. It's about recognizing that sustainable excellence requires
structuring work around human lives, not just human psychology. It's about having the courage to honor our whole
selves—the parts that need rest, play, connection, and meaning beyond our screens.

At Antropia, we're not just building products or delivering services. We're experimenting with what work could be—a
source of meaning and mastery that enhances rather than depletes our lives.

The question isn't whether we can afford to work this way. The question is whether we can afford not to.

---

*What's your relationship with work hours? I'd love to hear your thoughts and experiences as we continue this
experiment.*
